---
layout: post
title: Metis Data Science Week 1
---

This is the first in a series of posts I am working on detailing my journey as a student in the summer cohort of the Metis Data Science Bootcamp. My goal is to provide insight to anyone who is—much like I was—skeptical of both the recent rise in popularity of these bootcamps, and their ability to prep students for a career in data science in only 12 weeks. I'm going to try and give you as objective of a review as I can, or at the very least refrain from coming across as someone Metis paid to write this (read: a laudatory fanboy). But really, they aren't paying me; I paid them (and paid a lot).

Before we get into the nitty-gritty though, lets start with some background.

About Me

I graduated in 2015 with my bachelor's degree in Statistics and Psychology. I had held various positions in research (both intern and volunteer) prior to graduation, mainly in biopsychology/neuroscience labs. I worked for a year at a VA hospital in NYC as a research coordinator/data manager before applying to Metis. I am 25 years old. I had no publications prior to my Metis application. I self-taught myself Python for a year after graduating, using various courses on eDx, Udemy, etc., and StackOverflowing (trying to make that verb happen) questions/programming problems as they came up.

I was interested in the transition to data science both because I wanted to expand the analytical tools in my belt, and also because I had become disenchanted with a future in psychological research (that's not a knock against psych research per se, it's just that the next step in the process for me would have included a fairly long and involved doctoral program, and it's not a commitment I was ready to make just yet).

About the bootcamp

Metis offers a 12-week, full-time, in person program designed to accelerate the data science career of its students. You can read more about the specifics of the bootcamp and the Metis here. Essentially, you go through 3 months of intense programming and statistics/machine learning which culminates in a job search. You work on 5 data projects over the course of the program, presenting your final "passion project" at a career day for which employers are present. While you're not guaranteed a job at the end of the bootcamp, Metis' career services team provides a tremendous amount of support in helping you locate employment (that's not an exaggeration, more on employment later). I'm in the Summer 2016 Cohort, which is the 8th iteration of the program.

About the application

The application process for the bootcamp was fairly involved, and consisted of 3 rounds. First, I submitted a general application on the Metis website, listing my background and answering some statistics questions. There was a programming question akin to something you would find on HackerRank, and I was at liberty to choose the language I answered it in (I chose Python, as the entire bootcamp utilizes Python).

Once I had passed the first round, I was given a coding challenge which was to be completed within 48 hours. There were a few parts to the challenge, some of which were mandatory and others optional (for you to showcase your skill if you so chose). Another large component of the coding challenge was to design a potential passion project that I would be interested in working on if I was accepted.

The final round involved a Skype interview with one of Metis' Senior Data Scientists. This consisted of a few behavioral questions, some technical questions regarding the coding challenge, and then an overview of the project design I had come up with.

Week 1

So. On to the first week. I should note that between receiving my acceptance and the start of the bootcamp, I was given 50-75 hours of prerequisite work to complete via Github. This included python challenges, statistics and linear algebra exercises, and git and unix commands. The purpose of this was to make sure that everyone was at a similar minimum skill level once the program actually began.

First Impressions (the curriculum):

We wasted absolutely no time diving into the work. It's easy (and apparently, normal) to feel overwhelmed during your first week, we were told. Our days consist of pair programming and lectures in the morning, followed lecture applications/project work in the afternoons. For instance, we learned about pandas and numpy during a lecture in the morning, and were able to use it in the afternoon for our first project.

Oh, right. We got our first project on the first day. And were given a week to complete it. This didactic approach wasn't popular with all of the students, but was invaluable in the sense that it simulated getting a project out on a short deadline, with minimal knowledge and minimal direction.

First Impressions (the cohort):

I have to say that I feel incredibly fortunate in this regard. Metis selected a diverse cohort with varying educational and professional backgrounds. There are approximately even numbers of students with advanced degrees and students with only bachelor's degrees. Where the group is more unevenly segmented is in the particular field students come from; there are many more people coming from math and statistics than from computer science or other disciplines. The only instances in which background confers an advantage is during the first week when the curriculum tends to computer science and programming concepts, and later on in the course when the material is more heavily math and statistics focused.

What also surprised me was how supportive and enthusiastic my peers are. I was wary prior to the start of the bootcamp of the potential for personality clashes. Now, I'm not suggesting that everyone became best friends and started hanging out immediately. But what is appreciated is the lack of condescension/pedantry. Everyone exhibits a degree of willingness to learn/explain new concepts to everyone else which fosters an environment conducive to learning.

First Impressions (careers):

The aspect of the program of which I was the most skeptical prior to applying was the job placement portion. I wasn't sure how much I could trust the placement statistics. I figured that students with the most impressive degrees and backgrounds would have the easiest time finding jobs. I was sure that in the realm of for-profit education, the bare minimum would be offered for the most expensive of prices.

Though a portion of this remains to be seen (and I will assuredly keep you updated as things unfold); I've been pleasantly surprised. The most noticeably impressive quality of career placement here is the number of services they offer. In addition to resume/cover letter/LinkedIn help, they will carry out mock interviews with you covering both behavioral and technical questions. They bring in data scientists from their hiring partners to run the technical interviews so that you get as real and as thorough an experience as you can expect once you apply to jobs. They have speakers from different companies come in on a weekly basis to give talks (which provides great networking opportunities). We're going to do site visits to companies with data science departments in the coming weeks. There is an alumni network full of former students willing to answer your questions. If you are interested in a particular company or gain interest from a company, careers will put you in touch with anyone they are connected with in that company to get your foot in the door. They ordered us business cards the first week. They host Meetups and talks to bring people from the broader data science industry in the door and provide even more opportunities to network.

All of this has assured me that, provided you put in the effort, you should be a qualified and prepared job candidate by the time the bootcamp is over. And Metis provides a lot of resources to get you there. I surmise that, given that a job offer is typically contingent upon a successful interview, unsuccessful interviewing is what provides for the disparity between students that have graduated from Metis and students who've found jobs, not lack of opportunities.

In Summary

We got a very heavy dose of the very basic tools of a data scientist, including: Git/Github, Unix, Python (Numpy, Pandas, Matplotlib). We were thrown into our first project (which will be the subject of another post), and went from prompt-to-presentation in 5 days. 12 weeks of pair programming alone will drastically improve anyone's programming knowledge, or at least take you from brute-forcing every answer to using list comprehensions and lambda expressions more efficiently.

Looking forward to what next week holds.
